Piton de la Fournaise volcano, La R{\'e}union Island, is a basaltic shield volcano which underwent
an intense cycle of eruptive activity between 1998 and 2008. Self-potential and other geophysical
investigations of the volcano have shown the existence of a well-established hydrothermal system
within the summit cone. The present study investigates the relationship between changes in the
hydrothermal system and eruptive activity at the summit cone of Piton de la Fournaise. Here, we consider
the depth of the hydrothermal activity section to be the area where the hydrothermal flow is the most
intense along its path. Ten complete-loop self-potential surveys have been analyzed through multi-scale
wavelet tomography (MWT) to characterize depth variations of the hydrothermal system between
1993 and 2008. Our MWT models strongly support the existence of six main hydrothermalflow pathways
associated with the main edifice structure. Each of these pathways is part of the main hydrothermal
system and is connected to the main hydrothermal reservoir at depth. In both 2006 and 2008, around
Dolomieu crater, based on our results, the hydrothermal activity sections are located between
2300 and 2500 m a.s.l., which correlate well with the elevation of the observed fumarole belt within
the post-2007-collapse crater wall. Our results show that the depths of the local hydrothermal
activity sections change substantially over the investigated period. Vertical displacement
of the main potential generation area, associated withthese hydrothermal activity sections,
is observed on the order of several hundred meters at the transition between the period of quiescence
(1993--1997) and the resumption of eruptive activity in 1998 and 2007, respectively. From 1999
to March 2008, the hydrothermal system was consistently located at relatively shallow depths.By
quantitatively determining the vertical displacement of hydrothermal fluids over 16 years, we
identify a significant link between hydrothermal system and magmatic activity. Hydrothermal
system depth below the surface is an indicator of the activity level (pressurization/depressurization
of the volcano) within the shallowmagmatic systems. Thus, when used in conjunction with long term
volcano monitoring, this approach can contribute substantially to detection of the precursory
signals of changes in volcanic activity. 