A multi-parametric transient numerical simulation of the start-up of a large diameter Pulsating
Heat Pipe (PHP) specially designed for future experiments on the International Space Station (ISS)
are compared to the results obtained during a parabolic flight campaign supported by the European
Space Agency. Since the channel diameter is larger than the capillary limit in normal gravity, such
a device behaves as a loop thermosyphon on ground and as a PHP in weightless conditions; therefore,
the microgravity environment is mandatory for pulsating mode. Because of a short duration of microgravity
during a parabolic flight, the data concerns only the transient start-up behavior of the device.
One of the most comprehensive models in the literature, namely the in-house 1-D transient code CASCO
(French acronym for Code Avanc{\'e} de Simulation du Caloduc Oscillant: Advanced PHP Simulation
Code in English), has been configured in terms of geometry, topology, material properties and thermal
boundary conditions to model the experimental device.The comparison between numerical and experimental
results is performed simultaneously on the temporal evolution of multiple parameters: tube wall
temperature, pressure and, wherever possible, velocity of liquid plugs, their length and temperature
distribution within them. The simulation results agree with the experiment for different input
powers. Temperatures are predicted with a maximum deviation of 7%. Pressure variation trend is
qualitatively captured as well as the liquid plug velocity, length and temperature distribution.
The model also shows the ability of capturing the instant when the fluid pressure begins to oscillate
after the heat load is supplied, which is a fundamental information for the correct design of the
engineering model that will be tested on the ISS. We also reveal the existence of strong liquid temperature
gradients near the ends of liquid plugs both experimentally and by simulation. Finally, a theoretical
prediction of the stable functioning of a large diameter PHP in microgravity is given. Results show
that the system provided with an input power of 185W should be able to reach the steady state after
1min and maintain a stable operation from then on. 