The interplay between viscoelasticity and inertia in dilute polymer solutions at high deformation
rates can result in inertio-elastic instabilities. The nonlinear evolution of these instabilities
generates a state of turbulence with significantly different spatio-temporal features compared
to Newtonian turbulence, termed elasto-inertial turbulence (EIT). We explore EIT by studying
the dynamics of a submerged planar jet of a dilute aqueous polymer solution injected into a quiescent
tank of water using a combination of schlieren imaging and laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV). We show
how fluid elasticity has a nonmonotonic effect on the jet stability depending on its magnitude,
creating two distinct regimes in which elastic effects can either destabilize or stabilize the
jet. In agreement with linear stability analyses of viscoelastic jets, an inertio-elastic shear-layer
instability emerges near the edge of the jet for small levels of elasticity, independent of bulk
undulations in the fluid column. The growth of this disturbance mode destabilizes the flow, resulting
in a turbulence transition at lower Reynolds numbers and closer to the nozzle compared to the conditions
required for the transition to turbulence in a Newtonian jet. Increasing the fluid elasticity merges
the shear-layer instability into a bulk instability of the jet column. In this regime, elastic tensile
stresses generated in the shear layer act as an "elastic membrane'" that partially stabilizes the
flow, retarding the transition to turbulence to higher levels of inertia and greater distances
from the nozzle. In the fully turbulent state far from the nozzle, planar viscoelastic jets exhibit
unique spatio-temporal features associated with EIT. The time-averaged angle of jet spreading,
an Eulerian measure of the degree of entrainment, and the centerline velocity of the jets both evolve
self-similarly with distance from the nozzle. LDV measurements of the velocity fluctuations at
the jet centerline reveal a frequency spectrum characterized by a $-3$ power-law exponent, different
from the well-known $-5/3$ power-law exponent characteristic of Newtonian turbulence. We show
that the higher spectral energy of long wavelength modes in the EIT state results in coherent structures
that are elongated in the streamwise direction, consistent with the suppression of streamwise
vortices by elastic stresses. 