The electromagnetic fields of linear radiating systems working without dispersive and dissipative
losses are analyzed both in the time and the frequency domains. In the case of the time domain radiating
system, the parameter studied is the action, A, associated with the radiation. The action is defined
as the product of the energy and the duration of the radiation. In the case of the frequency domain
radiating system, which produces radiation in bursts of duration T/2 where T is the period of oscillation,
the parameter studied is the energy, U, dissipated in a single burst of radiation of duration T/2.
In this paper, we have studied how A and U vary as a function of the charge associated with the current
in the radiating system and the ratio of the length of the radiating system and its radius. We have
observed remarkable results when this ratio is equal to the ratio of the radius of the universe to
the Bohr radius. In the case of the time domain radiating system, we have observed that when the charge
associated with the current propagating along the radiator reaches the electronic charge, the
action associated with the radiation reduces to h/2*pi where h is the Planck constant. In the case
of the frequency domain radiating system, we have observed that as the magnitude of the oscillating
charge reduces to the electronic charge, the energy dissipated in a single burst of radiation reduces
to h*v, where v is the frequency of oscillation. Interestingly, all these results are based purely
on classical electrodynamics and general relativity. The importance of the findings is discussed.
In particular, the fact that the minimum free charge that exists in nature is the electronic charge,
is shown for the first time to be a direct consequence of the photonic nature of the electromagnetic
fields. Furthermore, the presented findings allow to derive for the first time an expression for
the dark energy density of the universe in terms of the other fundamental constants in nature, the
prediction of which is consistent with experimental observations. This Equation, which combines
together the dark energy, electronic charge and mass, speed of light, gravitational constant and
Planck constant, creates a link between classical field theories (i.e., classical electrodynamics
and general relativity) and quantum mechanics. 