Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) comprise a network of sensors subcutaneously implanted or
placed near the body surface and facilitate continuous monitoring of health parameters of a patient.
Research endeavours involving WBAN are directed towards effective transmission of detected parameters
to a Local Processing Unit (LPU, usually a mobile device) and analysis of the parameters at the LPU
or a back-end cloud. An important concern in WBAN is the lightweight nature of WBAN nodes and the need
to conserve their energy. This is especially true for subcutaneously implanted nodes that cannot
be recharged or regularly replaced. Work in energy conservation is mostly aimed at optimising the
routing of signals to minimise energy expended. In this paper, a simple yet innovative approach
to energy conservation and detection of alarming health status is proposed. Energy conservation
is ensured through a two-tier approach wherein the first tier eliminates `uninteresting' health
parameter readings at the site of a sensing node and prevents these from being transmitted across
the WBAN to the LPU. A reading is categorised as uninteresting if it deviates very slightly from its
immediately preceding reading and does not provide new insight on the patient's well being. In addition
to this, readings that are faulty and emanate from possible sensor malfunctions are also eliminated.
These eliminations are done at the site of the sensor using algorithms that are light enough to effectively
function in the extremely resource-constrained environments of the sensor nodes. We notice, through
experiments, that this eliminates and thus reduces around 90% of the readings that need to be transmitted
to the LPU leading to significant energy savings. Furthermore, the proper functioning of these
algorithms in such constrained environments is confirmed and validated over a hardware simulation
set up. The second tier of assessment includes a proposed anomaly detection model at the LPU that
is capable of identifying anomalies from streaming health parameter readings and indicates an
adverse medical condition. In addition to being able to handle streaming data, the model works within
the resource-constrained environments of an LPU and eliminates the need of transmitting the data
to a back-end cloud, ensuring further energy savings. The anomaly detection capability of the model
is validated using data available from the critical care units of hospitals and is shown to be superior
to other anomaly detection techniques. 