The amount of data generated by numerical simulations in various scientific domains such as molecular
dynamics, climate modeling, biology, or astrophysics, led to a fundamental redesign of application
workflows. The throughput and the capacity of storage subsystems have not evolved as fast as the
computing power in extreme-scale supercomputers. As a result, the classical post-hoc analysis
of simulation outputs became highly inefficient. In-situ workflows have then emerged as a solution
in which simulation and data analytics are intertwined through shared computing resources, thus
lower latencies. Determining the best allocation, i.e., how many resources to allocate to each
component of an in-situ workflow; and mapping, i.e., where and at which frequency to run the data
analytics component, is a complex task whose performance assessment is crucial to the efficient
execution of in-situ workflows. However, such a performance evaluation of different allocation
and mapping strategies usually relies either on directly running them on the targeted execution
environments, which can rapidly become extremely time-and resource-consuming, or on resorting
to the simulation of simplified models of the components of an in-situ workflow, which can lack of
realism. In both cases, the validity of the performance evaluation is limited. To address this issue,
we introduce SIM-SITU, a framework for the faithful simulation of in-situ workflows. This framework
builds on the SimGrid toolkit and benefits of several important features of this versatile simulation
tool. We designed SIM-SITU to reflect the typical structure of in-situ workflows and thanks to its
modular design, SIM-SITU has the necessary flexibility to easily and faithfully evaluate the behavior
and performance of various allocation and mapping strategies for in-situ workflows. We illustrate
the simulation capabilities of SIM-SITU on a Molecular Dynamics use case. We study the impact of
different allocation and mapping strategies on performance and show how users can leverage SIM-SITU
to determine interesting tradeoffs when designing their in-situ workflow. 