We report the first detection of metric radio emission from a surge, observed with the Nan\c{c}ay
Radioheliograph (NRH), STEREO and other instruments. The emission was observed during the late
phase of the M9 complex event SOL2010-02-012T11:25:00, described in a previous publication and
was associated with a secondary energy release, also observed in STEREO 304 {\AA} images: there
was no detectable soft X-ray emission. Triangulation of the STEREO images allowed the identification
of the surge with NRH sources near the central meridian. The radio emission of the surge occurred
in two phases and consisted of two sources, one located near the base of the surge, apparently at or
near the site of energy release, and another in the upper part of the surge; these were best visible
in the frequency range of 445.0 to about 300MHz, whereas a spectral component of different nature
was observed at lower frequencies. Sub-second time variations were detected in both sources during
both phases, with 0.2-0.3s a delay of the upper source with respect to the lower, suggesting superluminal
velocities. This effect can be explained if the emission of the upper source was due to scattering
of radiation from the source at the base of the surge. In addition, the radio emission showed signs
of pulsations and spikes. We discuss possible emission mechanisms for the slow time variability
component of the lower radio source. Gyrosynchrotron emission reproduced fairly well the characteristics
of the observed total intensity spectrum at the start of the second phase of the event, but failed
to reproduce the high degree of the observed circular polarization as well the spectra at other instances.
On the other hand, type IV-like plasma emission from the fundamental could explain the high polarization
and the fine structure in the dynamic spectrum; moreover, it gives projected radio source positions
on the plane of the sky, as seen from STEREO-A, near the base of the surge. Taking everything into consideration,
we suggest type IV-like plasma emission with a low intensity gyrosynchrotron component as the most
plausible mechanism. 