Aims. The present study aims at providing a deeper insight into the power and limitation of an unsupervised
classification algorithm (called Fisher-EM) on spectra of galaxies. This algorithm uses a Gaussian
mixture in a discriminative latent subspace. To this end, we investigate the capacity of this algorithm
to segregate the physical parameters used to generate mock spectra and the influence of the noise
on the classification. Methods. With the code CIGALE and different values for nine input parameters
characterising the stellar population, we have simulated a sample of 11 475 optical spectra of galaxies
containing 496 monochromatic fluxes. The statistical model and the optimum number of clusters
is given in Fisher-EM by the integrated completed likelihood (ICL) criterion. We repeated the analyses
several times to assess the robustness of the results. Results. Two distinct classifications can
be distinguished in the case of the noiseless spectra. The one above 13 clusters disappears when
noise is added, while the classification with 12 clusters is very robust against noise down to a signal
to noise ratio (SNR) of 3. At SNR=1, the optimum is 5 clusters, but the classification is still compatible
with the previous one. The distribution of the parameters used for the simulation shows an excellent
discrimination between classes. A higher dispersion both in the spectra within each class and in
the parameter distribution, leads us to conclude that despite a much higher ICL, the classification
with more than 13 clusters in the noiseless case is not physically relevant. Conclusions. This study
yields two conclusions valid at least for the Fisher-EM algorithm. Firstly, the unsupervised classification
of spectra of galaxies is both reliable and robust to noise. Secondly, such analyses are able to extract
the useful physical information contained in the spectra and to build highly meaningful classifications.
In an epoch of data-driven astrophysics, it is important to trust unsupervised machine learning
approaches that do not require training samples which are unavoidably biased. 